October 2024 October 2024
Rulebook released October 2024
Table of Contents
Introduction............................ 3
Using this Rulebook..................3
Gameplay. .................................... 3
How to Win. ..................................3
Decks...............................................3
The Four Elements. ................. 4
Cards............................................ 5
The Golden Rule. ..........................5
Card Types. ................................. 5
Avatars.............................................5
Sites...................................................6
Spells. ................................................7
Minions. ..........................................7
Artifacts.........................................8
Auras...............................................9
Magics. ............................................9
Game Zones. ..............................10
The Realm. ................................... 10
Atlas and Spellbook Decks. ... 10
Cemetery. ..................................... 10
Hand. .............................................. 10
Setup. ..........................................11
Winning the Game.................11
Death’s Door &
Death Blow. ................................. 11
Navigating the Realm. .........12
Areas of the Realm................... 12
Squares . ...................................... 12
The Void...................................... 12
Sites. .............................................. 12
Bodies of Water & Land....... 12
Surface & Subsurface............ 13
Regions........................................ 13
Locating Areas of the
Realm. ............................................ 14
Location...................................... 14
Adjacent and Nearby. ............ 14
Adjacent and Nearby
Locations.................................... 15
Steps ............................................ 15
Turn Summary. ........................16
1. Start Phase. ........................... 16
2. Main Phase. ........................... 16
3. End Phase.............................. 16
Casting Spells. ........................17
Mana............................................ 17
Elemental Threshold............. 18
Casting Minions....................... 19
Casting Artifacts. ..................... 19
Casting Auras. ........................... 19
Casting Magics. ........................ 19
Activating Abilities.............20
Tapping a Card........................ 20
Playing Sites. ............................. 20
Basic Abilities. ............................ 21
Move & Attack.......................... 21
Intercept..................................... 22
Attacking the Enemy............. 23
Defend. ......................................... 25
Pick Up or Drop Artifacts.... 26
Building Your Own
Decks..........................................26
Advanced Concepts. ..............27
Special Abilities......................... 27
Advanced Movement
Concepts. ...................................... 28
Damage Grids. ............................ 29
Occupying Multiple Sites. ...... 29
Ownership and Control. ......... 30
Projectiles.................................... 30
Static/Ongoing Effects. ........... 30
The Storyline.............................. 31
Glossary of Terms and
Keywords. .................................32
Quick Reference Guide. .......36
Common Keyword
Abilities. ........................................ 37
- 2 -
Introduction
In the unfathomable depths of the infinite void, great beings vie for control of fantastical realms, where
powerful magic imbues every living thing, and even the land itself. Take on the role of a powerful Avatar in
one of these realms, and tap into the arcane energies of the four elements—Air, Earth, Fire, and Water—
to summon mythical beasts, conjure ancient artifacts, and cast an array of powerful spells beyond all
imagining. Will you claim dominion over this contested realm?
Using this Rulebook
The goal of this rulebook is to get you up to speed and ready to play your first games of Sorcery: Contested
Realm. Experienced players will find it useful for helping to figure out interesting things that come up
during their games. For new players, carry on from here, have someone guide you through a few games, or
visit www.sorcerytcg.com/how-to-play where you’ll find tutorial videos and more.
The game uses terms and keywords that are important to know. When these come up, they have been
bolded to not only help you identify important words and concepts, but to also tell you that you can find
more information about that word in the glossary, starting on page 32.
Gameplay
In a game of Sorcery: Contested Realm, you interact with the realm as a powerful Avatar. You will have a
spellbook, a deck of cards that will allow you to cast spells that summon minions, conjure artifacts, and
more. You will also have access to your atlas, a deck of cards that allow you to add wondrous sites to the
play area that both expand your domain and empower you to cast even more devastating spells.
How to Win
Avatars are summoned to a contested realm with one goal: to vanquish their opponents and claim sole
dominion. In order to win, you must defeat any opposing Avatar by first reducing their life total to zero,
placing them at death’s door, and then delivering a final death blow to the weakened Avatar. This severs
the enemy’s connection to the realm and grants you victory!
Decks
For your first few games, you might want to use preconstructed decks, which will get you straight into the
action. Or you can craft your own decks, balancing and tuning their powers to fit your play style (see page
26). The world of Sorcery grants you endless possibilities!
- 3 -
The Four Elements
Sorcery: Contested Realm is built around the four classical elements: Air, Earth, Fire, and Water. Most
spells in a spellbook are tied to these elements, giving Avatars the power to manipulate the magic of the
realms. Each element has strengths and weaknesses. Certain abilities can be common in one element
yet very rare in another. The four elements and their characteristics are:
Air
Air is the element of Knowledge and Power, dabbling in forces beyond mortal control to
acquire the magical means to respond to any battlefield situation. An attunement with air
grants you both mobility and tactical options thanks to its ability to teleport units around
the realm and to increase its available spells.
Earth
Earth is the element of Enduring Strength, defined by its focus on fielding and enhancing
martial forces throughout the realm. An attunement with earth grants you the ability to
affect your atlas and minions that can dominate the battle through teamwork and sheer
fighting power.
Fire
Fire is the element of Desire and Destruction, willing to do whatever it takes to secure victory
in the realm. An attunement with fire grants you an array of explosive spells and abilities
that can create bursts of speed or burn friend and foe alike in great gouts of flame.
Water
Water is the element of Charm and Trickery, ready to adapt and disrupt the strategies of the
enemy as it manipulates all. An attunement with water grants you a powerful homefield
advantage that will slowly engulf the realm and the ability to position the enemy right
where you want them.
- 4 -
Cards
In Sorcery: Contested Realm, your cards are what allow you to influence the realm and do battle with
your opponent. Some cards will bend or even break the rules in this rulebook, in these cases the card’s
text takes precedence. Before we dig into how cards function in detail, it is important to keep one key
rule in mind at all times:
The Golden Rule
Some text is intentionally informal or necessarily compact. Use common sense and be cool.
1
2 3
Card Types
There are three main categories of cards: Avatars, sites, and spells. Spells further break down into four
card types: minion, artifact, aura, and magic. The following pages will describe each type.
Avatars
Your Avatar represents you and your connection
to the realm. Though but a pale echo of your true
might, everything you do within the realm is
done through your Avatar. Avatars have some key
characteristics:
•
Each Avatar has a name (1).
•
Avatars have a starting life (2), which will
rise and fall during the game and tells you
how much the Avatar can endure before being
placed at death’s door. This is also the Avatar’s
maximum life, which cannot be exceeded.
•
Avatars also have an attack power rating (3)
that tells you how hard they hit in combat.
•
Avatars have a game text box (4) that
describes their special abilities.
All Avatars are Spellcasters, which means they
can cast spells, most often from your hand.
Finally, Avatars can never enter a region other than
the surface and ignore many negative effects.
4
Units
A unit is a collective term that includes both Avatars and minions. Some cards might specify one of
these types of units, but most affect units in general.
- 5 -
1 2
3
4
Sites
A site is a locus of power within the
realm that you may explore and exploit.
Sites are usually played by activating
your Avatar’s ability, though they may
enter the realm in other ways.
You and your opponent can also attack
each other’s sites to cause your Avatars
to lose life, so make sure to defend
yours.
Sites have some key characteristics:
•
Sites have a name (1).
•
Sites have a typeline (2) that
describes key things about that
card, such as rarity.
•
Most sites have elemental symbols that increase your elemental affinity (3), which you will
harness to use spells and abilities (see page 18).
•
Sites have a game text box (4) that describes their special abilities.
•
Sites will provide you with mana, an important resource that you will need to play cards and use
abilities during your turn (see page 17).
•
Sites have two levels: surface and subsurface (see page 13).
Rubble
When a site is destroyed it is placed in its owner’s cemetery as normal, but rather than creating a new
void, the site is instead replaced with rubble. Rubble is a neutral land site that no player controls, and
provides no mana or threshold.
Note: You can use tokens or a face down site to represent rubble on a square.
- 6 -
1
2 4
3
Spells
Spells represent all of the magical might you are able to bring to bear on this realm. These include
minions to help you defend your lands and attack the enemy, powerful artifacts that will help you tip the
balance of power, magics of channeled energy that will overpower foes, and auras of lasting elemental
magic to impose your will on areas of the realm.
Minions
Minions are your greatest allies, assisting you with
myriad unique abilities in offense and defense.
Minions have a few key characteristics on their
card:
•
Each minion has a name (1).
•
Each minion has a mana cost (2) that you
must pay in order to play it.
•
Minions have an elemental threshold (3)
that your elemental affinity must meet in order
to be played.
•
Minions have a power rating (4) that reflects
how hard they hit in combat. It also describes
how much damage they can take before dying.
If the minion receives damage equal to or
greater than that value, it dies.
•
Minions have a type line (5) that describes
key things about that card, such as subtypes
and rarity.
•
Minions have a game text box (6) that
describes their special abilities.
5
6
Token Minions
Tokens are small-sized cards that work more or less the same as regular
cards while in the realm. The major difference between cards and tokens
is that tokens are never part of a player’s deck, and they can never formally
exist in any zone except within the realm. If a token would be placed
anywhere else, it is instead removed from the game entirely.
Note: You are free to use anything you want to represent tokens.
- 7 -
Artifacts
Artifacts are various relics, edifices, tools, gear,
gadgets, devices, and baubles, often charged with
lasting enchantments by wizards of old. Artifacts
have some key characteristics on their card:
•
Each artifact has a name (1).
•
Each artifact has a mana cost (2) that you
must pay to play it.
•
Artifacts have a type line (3) that describes
key things about that card, such as subtypes
and rarity.
•
Artifacts have a game text box (4) that
describes their special abilities.
Note: Unlike other spells, artifacts do not typically
require an elemental threshold to play.
Artifact Subtypes
Artifacts have a variety of subtypes, including
armor, weapons, relics, devices, documents,
automatons, or monuments. While most artifacts
are standard objects that can be carried into battle,
others such as automatons and monuments have
some further characteristics and restrictions.
1
2
3
4
Automatons
Automatons are
artifacts that are
minions. As such,
they have a power
rating (5), have the
same basic abilities as
regular minions, and
cannot be carried like
regular artifacts.
5
Monuments
Monuments are an
artifact subtype that
cannot be carried.
- 8 -
Auras
Auras are mostly incorporeal, but lasting,
manifestations of elemental power. They usually
impact a large area within the realm, conferring
boons or conditions within their reach.
Auras have some key characteristics on their card:
•
Each aura has a name (1).
•
Each aura has a mana cost (2) that you must
pay in order to play it.
•
Auras also have an elemental threshold
(3) that your elemental affinity must meet in
order to be played.
•
Auras have a type line (4) that describes key
things about that card, such as rarity.
•
Auras have a game text box (5) that describes
their special abilities.
1
2
3
4
5
Magics
Magics are transient spells that have immediate
impact and then dissipate as soon as they resolve.
Magics have some key characteristics on their
card:
•
Each magic has a name (1).
•
Each magic has a mana cost (2) that you
must pay in order to play it.
•
Magics also have an elemental threshold
(3) that your elemental affinity must meet in
order to be played.
•
Magics have a type line (4) that describes
key things about that card, such as rarity.
•
Magics have a game text box (5) that
describes their special abilities.
1
2
3
4
5
- 9 -
1
Game Zones
In Sorcery: Contested Realm, players share the main and biggest part of the play area—the realm.
However, each player has their own decks, discard pile, and hand. These are the game’s main zones.
The Realm
The realm (1) is a 5x4 square grid where most
cards are played. These twenty squares begin as
pieces of the void that you and your opponent may
fill in with sites as you expand your domains.
Atlas and Spellbook
Each player has two decks of cards—an atlas
of at least 30 site cards (2), containing maps to
domains waiting to be explored, and a spellbook
of at least 50 spell cards (3), filled with all of a
player’s accumulated magical knowledge. Players
will draw cards from these decks over the course
of a game.
When it comes to these decks, keep a few things
in mind:
•
The exact order of the cards in these decks is
unpredictable, thus whenever you search your
atlas or spellbook for a card, you must shuffle
it afterward.
•
Some effects allow you to place or reorder
known cards on the bottoms or tops of decks.
After doing so, you do not shuffle it.
Cemetery
Each player has a cemetery (4) which represents
a record of spent magic, dead minions, and broken
artifacts. Whenever any of your cards are discarded,
destroyed, resolved, or otherwise expired, place
them face-up in your cemetery.
Players may freely examine the contents of any
cemetery at any time and the order of the cards in
a cemetery is irrelevant.
Hand
Cards drawn from your spellbook or atlas decks
are kept in your hand (5). Your hand should
remain hidden from your opponents, however
the number of atlas and spellbook cards you hold
may be observed and asked, due to the card backs
being distinguishable.
There is no maximum hand size and the order of
the cards in your hand is irrelevant.
2
3
4
5
- 10 -
Setup
Now that you’re familiar with the components, follow these steps to set up a two-player game of Sorcery.
Step 1: Set Up the Realm
Clear some space in the middle of the table for
the realm (1).
Step 2: Place Avatars
Players place their Avatars on the square in the
middle of their bottom row (2).
Step 3: Prepare Decks
Players shuffle and place their atlas and
spellbook decks nearby (3), leaving some space
for their cemeteries (4).
Step 4: Determine First Player
Players may either decide who has the first turn,
or otherwise randomly choose who goes first.
Step 5: Draw Starting Hand
Each player draws three cards from their atlas
and three cards from their spellbook (5). If you’re
not satisfied with your initial hand, you may take
one mulligan.
To take a mulligan, return up to three cards from
your hand to the bottom of their respective decks
in any order. Then redraw the same number of
cards you returned from each deck.
2
1
3
2
5 4
Winning the Game
The game ends when a player has vanquished all opposing Avatars, securing their hold on the realm! In
order to do this, you’ll need to get them to death’s door, then follow up with a death blow.
Alternatively, if either player attempts to draw a card from an empty deck, they immediately lose.
Death’s Door & Death Blow
As an Avatar loses life, its connection with the realm weakens. When an Avatar’s life is reduced to 0,
they are now at death’s door and can no longer gain life. At that moment, the wounded Avatar becomes
immune to damage for the rest of the turn.
After that brief and desperate window, any damage dealt to the Avatar is a death blow, finally severing
their connection to the realm and signaling their defeat.
- 11 -
Navigating the Realm
In Sorcery: Contested Realm battles are often won or lost in the way you position and maneuver your
units. The following pages will cover how to navigate both the square grid and the layers of the realm.
Areas of the Realm
The realm is split into twenty squares. These squares begin as pieces of the void that you and your
opponent may fill in with sites as you expand your domains.
The Void
The void is a region of incorporeal nothingness on top of which you will build your physical domain.
Any minion that somehow finds its way into the void (whether in whole or in part) is immediately
banished (removed from the game) unless it has an ability that specifically allows it to exist there (such
as Voidwalk).
Sites
As you and your opponent expand your domains, you will replace void squares by playing site cards on
them. These sites will form up to create bodies of water and land for your units to traverse and conquer.
Water and Land Sites
Sites can be separated into two main types. Water sites are identified by the water threshold icon (marked
). All other sites are considered land sites, including sites with no threshold icons and rubble.
with Bodies of Water & Land
As sites are played, they will begin to form
bodies of water and land. A contiguous
cluster of adjacent water sites is known
as a body of water. Similarly, a contiguous
cluster of adjacent land sites forms a
body of land. It is possible to have more
than one body of each, or for the realm
to be completely land or water.
1
4
For example, the two Spring Rivers and
the Aqueduct form a body of water (1).
Even though the Aqueduct has a it also has a , so it is a water site.
icon,
3 2
The Autumn River is a separate, single-
site body of water (2), since only
adjacent sites are considered and not
those placed diagonally.
The Steppe and Dark Tower form a body
of land (3), and the Arid Desert is its
own single-site body of land (4).
- 12 -
Surface & Subsurface of Sites
Each site is made up of two levels, above and below the card. A site’s upper level is generally referred to
as the surface and its lower one is the subsurface.
The Surface
The upper level of all sites form a region known as the surface. This is where units will typically move
and wage war on the enemy. All units above a site are considered to be on the surface.
The Subsurface
The subsurface is divided into two regions, depending on what type of site it is. The lower level of a land
site is part of the underground region. Similarly, the lower level of a water site, is part of the underwater
region. Existing in the subsurface is extremely hazardous and minions that somehow find their way there
immediately die, unless otherwise allowed to do so with special abilities (see page 37).
Atop and Under
When cards enter a site’s surface level, place it atop the site to show that it is on the surface, or slide it
under the site to show that it occupies the subsurface.
If a card refers to something atop a site, it applies to something on the surface of the site, but not
anything below it. Similarly, if a card refers to something under a site, it applies to something in the
subsurface of the site, but not anything above it.
Regions
Altogether, there are four regions in the game:
•
void
•
surface
•
underground
•
underwater
Note: Most abilities from cards in the realm affect things within the region where the card is located. Similarly,
in the case of spells, their affects typically apply to the same region as its Spellcaster. However, some cards can
effect specific areas, regions, or even the whole realm, regardless of the card’s own region.
For example:
The Porcupine Pufferfish (1)
occupies the Underwater region
under the site in its square.
The Headless Haunt (2) occupies
a square in the Void region.
The Cave Trolls (3) occupy the
Underground region under the
site in its square.
The Sea Serpent (4) and
Diluvian Kraken (5) occupy the
Surface region atop the sites in
their squares, as does the King of
the Realm (6) atop the site in his
square.
2
5
1
3
6
4
- 13 -
Locating Areas of the Realm
Perhaps the single most important key concept to understand is how to identify areas in the realm
relative to your card’s position.
Location
A location is defined as one region in one square.
Here and There
Some cards will talk about something that is here or there contextually. When a site is referenced,
here or there means both of a site’s locations, surface and subsurface. When anything else is being
referenced, it means that thing’s same exact location.
Targeting
Sometimes you will need to target things in the realm. Spells and abilities can only target things within
the Spellcaster’s or referencing card’s same region.
Adjacent and Nearby
Sometimes a card will need to identify something in an adjacent or nearby square.
•
Adjacent: Refers to the card’s own square, and the squares that it shares a border with.
•
Nearby: Refers to the card’s own square, and all squares that surround it, including those
diagonally.
These five squares are
adjacent to the card
These nine squares are
nearby the card
- 14 -
Adjacent and Nearby Locations
Only locations that are in the same region as the referencing card adjacent or nearby locations.
(or its Spellcaster) are considered
4
3
6
5
1
2
In this example, the King of the Realm (1) is beset
by enemies on nearly all sides! Some pose a greater
threat than others. Let’s take a closer look.
The King is adjacent to the Sea Serpent (2)
because it is next to him on the surface of the site
and therefore in the same region. Similarly, the
Diluvian Kraken (3) is nearby the King.
The King is not adjacent to the Headless
Haunt (4) because the Haunt is in the Void region.
The Cave Trolls (5) are not adjacent to the King
because they are burrowed and are therefore
in a different region. Similarly, the Porcupine
Pufferfish (6) is not nearby the King because it is
submerged.
The Pufferfish and Cave Trolls are not adjacent
to each other as they are in different regions,
underwater and underground, respectively.
Similarly, the Pufferfish is not adjacent to the
Headless Haunt, nor are the Cave Trolls nearby
the Headless Haunt.
Steps
A step is the minimum unit of distance between two adjacent locations. Some card abilities will have
an effect that will happen a step away or even several steps away from where the card is or its origin
point. In these cases, it will say that it happens X steps away.
- 15 -
Turn Summary
Sorcery: Contested Realm is played over a series of turns. Players take their turns, one at a time, following
this sequence of phases:
Start Phase
The start phase is the first phase you complete during your turn. All abilities that last “Until next turn”
now end. Then:
Step 1. Step 2. Step 3. Step 4. All of your cards that are tapped now untap.
All of your sites now provide their mana for this turn.
Trigger abilities that happen at the start of the turn.
Finally, draw a card from either your spellbook or atlas.
Main Phase
The main phase is where most of Sorcery’s actions and events take place. During this phase, your units
can be ordered to do two types of actions. They can:
•
Cast a spell from your hand if they are a spellcaster (see page 17) or,
•
Activate one of their abilities (see page 20)
You may have your units do these as many times as you have resources to do so, and in any order you like.
For example, you might move a minion, then cast a spell with your Avatar, and then move another minion.
End Phase
The end phase is the last phase you complete during your turn.
Step 1. Trigger abilities that happen at the end of the turn.
Step 2. Players remove all damage from their minions and artifacts in the realm.
Step 3. Effects that last for your turn now end.
Step 4. Your turn ends.
Note: Avatars do not heal automatically at the end of the turn in the same way as damage is removed from
minions, however they can heal using spells and other card effects.
Your First Turn
No Card Draw (First Player)
If you are the first player to take a turn in the game, skip Step 4 of the Start Phase.
Establishing Your Domain
During your first Main Phase, your Avatar needs to establish their domain within the realm. To do
this, you must use your Avatar’s ability to play a site to your Avatar’s square.
- 16 -
Casting Spells
Spells are the main way Avatars and other Spellcasters influence the realm. Any card in your hand that is
not a site is a spell. You cast these spells to summon minions, conjure artifacts or auras, and invoke magics.
To cast a spell from your hand, you need to identify a Spellcaster under your control to cast it. The
Spellcaster and its location are by whom and where the spell is being cast. Once you have identified the
Spellcaster, spells often have two requirements to play: a mana cost and an elemental threshold.
Mana
All of your Spellcasters use mana to cast their spells and some abilities may also draw from this power.
You can only gain mana during your turn and lose any unspent mana at the end of your turn.
Gaining Mana
At the start of your turn, all of your sites provide one mana each, forming a mana pool for you to draw from.
When one of your sites enters the realm, it immediately provides one mana. If you lose a site, the mana it
provided this turn is not removed from your mana pool. If you gain control of an enemy’s site during your
turn, it does not provide you with mana until your next turn.
Other card types might also provide mana turn-after-turn in a manner similar to sites, or simply increase
your pool for the current turn.
Using Mana
Spells cost mana to cast. This is identified by the card’s mana cost in the upper left hand corner. To cast that
spell, you must be able to pay the cost from your available mana. You cannot pay a mana cost if the amount
required exceeds the mana available.
For example, your sites each
provide one mana that you
can spend this turn (1).
Currently, that number
is three. Note that your
opponent’s Aqueduct
does not provide you mana
(2). In your hand (3), you
have some minions and a site.
You could play both the Sedge
Crabs and Polar Explorers as
their total mana cost is three.
You don’t currently have enough mana to play Captain
Baldassare with his mana cost of four. However, you do
have a site, Maelström, that you can play using your Avatar’s
ability (4). Playing Maelström would bring your total
available mana up to four, allowing you to play Captain
Baldassare, saving the Crabs and Explorers for a later turn.
2
1
3
1
1
4
- 17 -
Elemental Threshold
In addition to mana, you will often need to meet an elemental threshold to cast most spells or use
some abilities. Spells and some abilities will have one or more elemental symbols ( for fire, for air,
for water, and for earth) next to the mana cost on spells, or to the left of abilities in text boxes.
To play that card or use that ability, you must have at least as many matching symbols on the sites you
control, plus any others granted by spells or abilities.
Elemental threshold is not spent like mana. It is simply a minimum affinity you must have for the
specified elements to use some cards. All artifacts and most abilities have no threshold at all, so you
need only to ensure that you can pay any associated costs to make use of them.
For example, your Floodplain,
Autumn River, and Maelström
sites each grant you one
3
4
affinity (1), however Boneyard
does not (2). So your affinity is
currently three . Note that
your opponent’s Aqueduct does
not grant you affinity (3).
In your hand (4), you have
some minions, including Adept
Illusionist and Polar Explorers,
both of which you want to play this turn.
Because elemental affinity is not spent or lost when
playing cards, you just need to check each card’s
elemental threshold and see if your affinity is equal to or
greater than the threshold. This means that you can play
both the Illusionist and Explorers this turn since they each
only require a threshold of two , compared to your
affinity of three .
1
1
1
2
Mulitiple Element Threshold
Some spells might require affinity with
different elements. Like with other spells, you
must be able to meet all of a spell’s required
threshold in order to cast it. So for example, to
cast Sir Pelleas, you’ll need to control sites with
at least one Air and two Water threshold symbols.
Cards that have different element symbols
count as a spell of each of those affinities. So Sir
Pelleas is both an Air spell and a Water spell at
the same time.
- 18 -
Casting Minions
When a minion spell has been cast, it summons the minion under your control atop any of your sites,
and they remain in the realm until something causes them to leave play.
Note: There is no limit to the number of minions that may occupy the same site, though it’s rarely a good
idea to concentrate your forces in just one spot!
Summoning Sickness
Whenever a unit is summoned into the realm, whether from being cast or from another card’s effect,
it suffers summoning sickness until the end of turn as it prepares for battle. A unit suffering from
summoning sickness cannot tap, or be tapped, to pay for costs associated with any ability. This includes
any additional abilities that may have been granted by spells and artifacts.
Note: When you summon a unit on your turn, it enters play untapped, so you may use it to defend on your
opponent’s turn.
Casting Artifacts
When an artifact spell is cast, it is conjured into the realm atop any site you control or directly into the
waiting hands of one of your units. A unit can carry any number of artifacts.
Casting Auras
When an aura spell is cast, it conjures the aura at the intersection of four squares, though some specify
the border between two, or even just a single square. At least one of those squares must contain a site.
Auras are said to occupy the surface of any sites at those squares, as well as any void, affecting them (or
other things located at those sites) in some way.
Casting Magics
Magics are the only cards in the game that do not enter play when they are cast, and do not have a lasting
presence in the realm. A magic spell simply does what it says it does, and then goes to its owner’s cemetery.
- 19 -
1
Activating Abilities
Avatars, minions, artifacts, and auras may all have abilities that can be activated simply by stating your
intention to do so, making any relevant choices (like picking targets), and paying any associated costs.
Unlike spells, which use mana costs most often, abilities will use a variety of costs including things like
tapping, paying life, sacrificing a minion, or discarding cards, among other things. Only the controller
of a card can use its activated abilities, and only during the main phase of their own turn when nothing
else is already happening.
Tapping a Card
Cards in the realm can be tapped as a resource,
spending their energy as a cost to activate various
abilities. Tap abilities are usually written as,
“Tap → Ability text.”
A player may also need to tap a card as a cost
related to other spells or abilities on other cards.
To tap a card, turn it 90° to the right from its
upright position (1). A card that has been turned
90° in this way is “tapped,” while an upright card is
“untapped.” Cards can also untap at certain points
in the game. To do that, simply turn it 90° to the
left back into its upright position (2).
Note: Players can only tap untapped cards and
untap tapped cards.
Reminder: Minions that you have summoned this
turn have Summoning Sickness and cannot be
tapped to pay for the costs of abilities.
2
Playing Sites
Sites come into play through your Avatar’s activated ability: “Tap → Play or draw a site” (1). However,
there are some other cards that can bring them into play as well.
When you play a site, it must be placed:
•
on void (2) or rubble (3), and
•
adjacent to another site that you control (4) or as close as possible to your Avatar if you control
no sites.
There can only be one site per grid square, which means sites are generally placed on an adjacent void,
permanently extending the physical boundaries of your domain within the realm. Sites can also be
played on rubble, replacing it entirely.
1 2
4
3
- 20 -
Basic Abilities
All units (Avatars and minions) have access to five basic abilities that are not printed on their card.
Three are activated abilities that allow them to interact with the realm. These are: Move and Attack,
which is the ability you’ll use most often; and Pick Up and Drop, which relate to carrying artifacts.
The remaining two are triggered abilities that units can perform during the opponent’s turn. These
abilities are called Intercept and Defend, and are described below alongside their triggers.
Move and Attack
Every unit can tap in order to activate the Move and Attack ability, which allows it to optionally move,
then optionally attack something at its location. When using this ability, declare both the intended
movement path and eventual attack target up front, then resolve it. Moving and attacking are described
in more detail below.
Moving your Units
When moving a unit, its journey is broken down into individual steps. By default, units can move one
step. However, some abilities allow units to take additional steps (such as Movement +X) and other
abilities allow units to take steps diagonally or even into different regions (see page 12).
To move a unit using the Move and Attack ability, you first declare each step the unit will take (along
with any eventual attack target), and then you resolve the steps in order. When you declare movement,
the only restriction is that you may not repeat specific steps.
Normally, this means that you will simply declare a single step, from the surface of one site to the surface
of an adjacent site.
1
For example, your Amazon Warriors
tap (1) and you declare a step from
the surface of the Rustic Village to
the surface of the Holy Ground (2).
2
If your units have movement-enhancing abilities, or there are movement modifying effects in play, you
might choose to declare a more complex path. As you resolve each step, you confirm that it is a legal step
at that moment. If it is not legal, you do not take that step, and continue resolving anything remaining.
If your unit takes at least one step, it has moved; if it takes zero steps, it has not moved.
“Take a Step” verses “X Steps Away”
If an effect instructs a unit to take a step or move one step, the unit may modify its step via abilities like
Airborne, Voidwalk, Burrowing, and Submerge.
If a card instructs you to pick a target up to X steps away, you cannot apply movement abilities; you
simply count one adjacent square per step, without changing regions.
- 21 -
Intercept
Intercept is one of two basic abilities that you can use on your opponent’s turn, because it is a triggered
ability (the other ability is Defend, described on page 25). If you leave your units untapped, you may be
able to use them to react to your opponent’s movement, helping to protect your sites and units.
If an enemy uses its Move and Attack basic ability to move, any of your units may tap to intercept when the
enemy enters that unit’s location, as long as the enemy is not also attacking at that location. If the enemy
is attacking at that location, you will have a chance to defend instead.
Units can not move when they intercept. They must already be at the location the enemy enters.
When you intercept, the enemy stops moving, and their intended attack (if any) does not happen. No
attack occurs, and thus there is no opportunity to further defend. Instead, the intercepting unit (or units)
and the intercepted enemy simply fight, striking each other simultaneously (see page 23).
Any number of units may intercept a single enemy, as long as they all tap and they all occupy the location
the enemy entered.
Reminder: Only movement via the Move and Attack ability can be intercepted.
1
3
2
Intercepting
For example, your opponent’s Rimland Nomads minion has tapped (1) to move to the Arid Desert using
its Movement +1 ability. However, your Amazon Warriors are untapped and can Intercept. The Amazon
Warriors tap (2), stopping the Rimland Nomads from reaching the Arid Desert (3). The Rimland
Nomads must now fight the Amazon Warriors at their location.
- 22 -
Attacking the Enemy
The target of an attack must be an enemy unit at your location, or the surface of an enemy site that
you occupy. When using the Move and Attack basic ability you first declare your intended target (along
with any movement), tap, resolve any movement, and then finally resolve the attack. As you resolve the
attack, you confirm it is a legal target at that moment, and if so, your unit has attacked.
2
1
Attacking
For example, the Amazon
Warriors tap (1) to declare a
Move and Attack, targeting
the Rimland Nomads.
The Amazon Warriors first
resolve their movement (2).
Only then, having arrived
at their intended target,
are they considered to be
attacking.
Attacking Enemy Units
If the target of your attack is an enemy unit, either as your original intent or because your opponent
defended (see page 25), the units involved will fight. To fight, units strike each other simultaneously.
When a unit strikes, it deals damage equal to its power.
Striking
Carrying on from the example
above, the Amazon Warriors and
Rimland Nomads now fight, striking
each other simultaneously (3).
The Amazon Warriors deal five
damage to the Rimland Nomads
who deal two damage in return.
3
Striking First
Some units may be able to land their blows before their enemy can respond. Units that strike first resolve
their strikes before their target can resolve theirs. If multiple units in the same fight are able to strike
first, they all strike at the same time. Then any surviving units without that ability make their strikes.
Multiple Combatants
If more than two units are involved in a fight (usually as a result of intercepting or defending), the
controller of each side may allocate their units’ damage among the enemy as they wish.
Minions with Split Power
Some minions have their Power split into an
offensive value, or Attack Power and a defensive
one, known as Defense Power. When it strikes, use
the first one, and when damage is being allocated
to them, use the second.
Cards that modify a unit’s Power do so to both
Attack and Defense Power, so for example
Overpower will increase both Attack and Defense
Power by two.
Attack Power is noted on
the left over the sword,
and Defense Power is on
the right over the shield.
- 23 -
Damage to Minions
Damage dealt to minions persists until the end of the turn. A minion that accumulates damage greater
than or equal to its power immediately dies and is placed in its owner’s cemetery.
Note: Zero damage is not any damage at all, so units with 0 power must take at least 1 damage to die.
2
5
4
5
Continuing our attack example, the Amazon Warriors suffer two damage from the Rimland Nomads.
While this does not kill them (4), if they take three more damage this turn, they will die. On the other
hand, the Nomads suffer five damage, well exceeding its power of two and so it immediately dies (5).
Damage to Avatars
Throughout the game, you track your Avatar’s life. Damage dealt to an Avatar with one or more life
reduces their life by that amount. Damage dealt to an Avatar on death’s door causes a death blow (see
page 11) and ends the game.
Attacking the Surface of an Enemy Site
If the target of your attack is the surface of an enemy site, the Avatar that controls that site loses life
equal to the attacking unit’s power. Importantly, this is not a strike, nor is it damage, so attacking a site
does not deliver a death blow. You can still attack sites of an Avatar at death’s door, but it will not
usually affect them.
1
5
-5
3
2
For example, the Amazon
Warriors attack your
opponent’s undefended
Red Desert (1) with
five power (2). Your
opponent’s Avatar of Fire
then loses five life (3).
Remember: Losing life
like this is not damage.
- 24 -
Defend
Defend is one of two basic abilities that you can use on your opponent’s turn, because it is a triggered
ability (the other is Intercept, described on page 22).
If an enemy uses its Move and Attack basic ability to attack a unit or site you control, any of your other
units that can reach the attack’s location may tap to defend. Any number of units may defend against a
single enemy.
The defending unit (or units) moves to the attack’s location, ready to join the fight. During this movement
a defending unit may use any of its movement abilities, such as Airborne, Burrowing, Movement +X,
Submerge, or Voidwalk.
If the original target of the attack was a unit, the defender’s controller may decide if that unit remains in
the fight, or is removed. If the original target was a site, it is automatically removed.
Remember: Only “attacks” can be defended; attacks are only caused by the Move and Attack basic ability,
or very specific card text that uses the word “attack.”
1
2
In this example, let’s say that your Rimland Nomads are attacked by the Amazon Warriors again. But
this time you have an untapped Sand Worm at an adjacent site. You can then tap your Sand Worm (1)
and move it to the location of the Rimland Nomads (2) to defend them.
You can then decide to remove the Nomads from the ensuing fight. If they remain, they will be involved
in the battle and your opponent will be able to allocate damage to them. However this may be a good
idea since together the Sand Worm and Nomads can take down the Amazon Warriors. If you choose
to remove the Nomads, they cannot be allocated damage, but will leave the Sand Worm to take on the
Warriors alone.
- 25 -
Pick up or Drop Artifacts
Each unit can activate their Pick Up basic ability once per turn, which allows it to pick up any number of
artifacts at locations it occupies.
Each unit can also activate the Drop basic ability once per turn, so long as it hasn’t participated in combat,
this allows it to drop any number of artifacts it’s carrying.
Carrying Artifacts
A unit can carry any number of artifacts, which will move with the unit throughout the realm. If a unit
is carrying any artifacts when it leaves the realm, the artifacts are dropped. If a unit and an artifact it is
carrying stop sharing a location due to some effect, the artifact ceases to be carried.
Controlling Artifacts
Artifacts carried by a unit are controlled by the player who controls that unit. Artifacts that could be
carried but are not currently being carried are uncontrolled. Artifacts that cannot be carried normally
(e.g. Automatons and Monuments) are controlled by the player who conjured them.
Building Your Own Decks
Sorcery: Contested Realm is a customizable trading card game, which means that you can choose what
cards go into your deck. When you’re ready to construct your own deck, there are a few rules you must
follow to build decks fit for play:
•
You need to choose and include exactly one Avatar card.
•
Your Atlas must contain at least 30 site cards.
•
Your Spellbook must contain at least 50 spell cards.
You may have larger decks as long as you can reasonably
shuffle them.
Rarity
The type line of a spell or site describes the card’s
rarity (1). This tells you how many copies of that
card you can have in your deck. Each player may
include:
•
up to four copies of any ordinary cards
•
up to three copies of any exceptional cards
•
up to two copies of any elite cards
•
only one copy of any unique cards in a deck
Your Avatar does not count toward any of those
totals, and is not in that sense a part of either of
your decks.
1
- 26 -
Advanced Concepts
Special Abilities
Most cards in Sorcery have one or more special abilities printed in their game text box that change the
default rules of the game or grant new interactions outside of the basic abilities.
Passive Ability
A passive ability has an ongoing effect that
is always active, as long as the card is in the
relevant game zone. Typically, this zone will be
the realm, but some cards have abilities that
specify things they do, or enable you to do, while
in your hand, or while in the cemetery, etc.
Keyword Ability
A keyword is a word or phrase that functions as
shorthand for a longer piece of rules text. They
are used to communicate concepts that require
more text than what will fit on a card. You can
find these longer explanations in the glossary on
page 33.
Activated Ability
An activated ability takes effect simply by stating
your intention to do so and paying any related
costs, such as tapping or spending mana. By
default, only the controller of a card can use
its activated abilities, and only during the main
phase of their own turn, when nothing else is
already happening.
Triggered Ability
A triggered ability requires that a specified
condition is met, or a specified event occurs, to
automatically take effect. These abilities can be
recognized by their use of words such as “when,”
“whenever,” and “at [a specified moment],”
though a few cards have nonstandard wording
due to space constraints.
- 27 -
Advanced Movement Concepts
Entering a Location, Site, or Void
A unit is said to have entered a location, site, or a void if it was not occupying that particular spot, and
now it is (even if just for a moment as a result of Movement +X, for example), or when it was summoned
or conjured there.
Teleporting
Teleportation effects move a unit directly to a specified location without taking any steps in between.
Moving Freely
Some cards can move freely within the realm or in a defined area. When a unit uses the Move and Attack
or Defend abilities they spend no steps when moving, as long as the starting and ending locations of the
step satisfy the moves freely condition.
Special Movement Effects
Some effects will push, pull, or drag things, or simply cause them to be moved. This is forced movement,
and is not modified by a unit’s abilities, such as Airborne, Burrowing, Submerge, or Voidwalk. Units
that cannot move by activating their own abilities, can still be moved by other cards and effects.
If an effect causes a unit to ‘take a step’ or ‘take up to X steps’ this is not forced movement, and the unit
can modify these steps with their abilities. Units that cannot move by activating their own abilities, also
cannot carry out any steps granted by these effects.
Note: A unit that is made to move, either by a spell’s effect or is otherwise forcibly moved does not tap and
cannot be intercepted, as it is not moving as part of the Move and Attack basic ability.
When Sites Move
If a site moves to another square, everything atop and under it
moves with it (however, those cards are not considered to have
moved). Generally, a site can only move or be moved to a square
without another site – a void. Any cards in that void are now placed
atop the site that was moved in.
Carrying Units
Some units can carry other units. A unit with this ability, picks them
up or drops them in the same manner and time as it would artifacts
(see page 26). Units that have Airborne, Burrowing, Submerge,
or Voidwalk confer those abilities to units they are carrying while
they are carried.
A unit being carried may still cast spells or activate abilities as normal.
If the carried unit moves to a location that the carrying unit doesn’t
occupy, the unit ceases to be carried.
- 28 -
Damage Grids
Some cards have abilities that deal damage or otherwise affect units
or multiple sites over a wide area. To simplify rules text and illustrate
the extent of these spells, some cards contain a damage grid in their
rules box.
Damage grids may use a bold square to indicate the center of the
card’s effect, or a dot to show the Spellcaster’s location on the grid.
By default, a damage grid indicates that the ability deals damage to
each unit at locations within the area of effect and within the same
region, though cards may specify otherwise.
Occupying Multiple Sites
Units normally occupy only one site while in the realm, however
some large units may occupy multiple sites at once due to their
enormous size. Such units follow the regular rules for summoning,
so you choose a single site you control when you cast the minion
spell. As they enter the realm, you choose a 2x2 area that it can legally
occupy, which must include the summoning site. To represent the
minion’s locations, place the card at the intersection of those sites.
A large unit occupies all of its sites. Therefore, if grid damage is dealt
to multiple such sites, large units take damage equal to the sum of
the damage dealt on all of the sites they occupy.
A unit is at each of the sites (or void squares) that it occupies, so it
can be standing on both land and water sites (or void squares) at the
same time.
The same applies in general for any effect that checks whether
something is true about a large unit’s site.
When a large unit moves, you choose a direction and all parts of
it move that direction. If any part of it can’t move in the chosen
direction, then it can’t move in that direction at all.
When attacking, a large unit still targets only a single enemy unit or site.
Teleporting Large Units
When a large unit is teleported, it must be to a location or set of locations that conforms to its size
restrictions and is otherwise legal for that unit to occupy.
- 29 -
Ownership and Control
You have ownership of all of the cards you bring to a game of Sorcery. You are, therefore, the owner
of those cards. The owner of a card does not change during the game. A card is always returned to its
owner’s hand, shuffled into its owner’s deck, or sent to its owner’s cemetery regardless of who controls
the card when it leaves play.
While the owner of a card is most often its controller, control of cards in play may change over the
course of a game. When rules text uses phrases like “your minions” or “your sites,” that refers to those
things that you control, and not to those things that you own.
Projectiles
A projectile’s flight begins at the shooting unit’s location
and travels within the same region in a cardinal direction.
Its flight continues until it either reaches the edge of its
region or it reaches the first unit (enemy or ally) along its
path, ignoring any allies at the projectile’s starting location.
Different projectiles will have different effects, but will most
often deal damage to the impacted unit.
In the event of multiple valid units, the player that fired the
projectile chooses which unit the projectile hits.
Cardinal directions from the card
2
1
3
1
1
1
4
For example, your Lava Salamander casts a Firebolts spell to the right towards the opponent’s House
Arn Bannerman (1). Each of the three projectiles travel in the chosen cardinal direction, starting at
the Salamander’s location and travelling over the Arid Desert, avoiding the burrowed Cave Trolls,
which are not in the same region (2). When they arrive at the Rustic Village, you can have the first
two projectiles hit the Bannerman, which suffers two damage and dies (3). Unfortunately, the third
projectile then hits your own Seasoned Sellsword (4), since projectiles hit friend and foe alike!
Static/Ongoing Effects
Auras and minions with passive abilites will have an ongoing impact on the realm. These static effects
should be applied at all times, even while resolving other effects or actions, and take precedence over
triggered abilities.
- 30 -
The Storyline
When the story being told during a game of Sorcery starts to get complicated, particularly when multiple
abilities trigger at the same time, you can use the Storyline to help resolve them.
A Storyline begins each time a unit casts a spell or activates an ability at which point one or more
events are placed at the relevant points on the Storyline and are then resolved in order, one at a time.
Sometimes, the resolution of a spell, effect, or event will cause it to split into several smaller events (eg.
the individual steps within a unit’s movement), which are each placed on the Storyline at their relevant
points before the Storyline continues to play out.
Target units or locations must be chosen as an event is being added to the Storyline, otherwise an event
only needs more detail when it comes time to resolve it.
For example, your Ghost Ship taps
to use the Move and Attack ability
(1). You declare their intended
path and the target of their attack,
adding a single step of movement
and an attack against the Autumn
River to the storyline (2).
1
2
Ghost Ship
moves: void 13
to surface 12
Ghost Ship
attacks:
Autumn River
Triggered Abilities
If the resolution of one event triggers an ability, a new event will be inserted into the storyline. The new
event is added at the current moment, temporarily interrupting any remaining events on the Storyline.
Once this new event has been resolved, the story will continue.
If multiple events are competing to be added at the same point on the Storyline, the non-active player
places their events first, then the active player places their events on the Storyline after them. If either
player has multiple events of their own, they can place them in whatever order they wish.
Your Ghost Ship’s movement has
resolved (3), triggering both its
summon ability and the hunting
instincts of the opponent’s Giant
Shark (4).
As the non-active player, your
opponent places their ability on
the storyline first (5).
4 4
3
3
Ghost Ship
moves: void 13
to surface 12
Giant Shark
moves: surface
11 to 12
Giant Shark
fights:
Ghost Ship
Ghost Ship
summons a
spirit
5
Ghost Ship
attacks:
Autumn River
If a card leaves the realm, any of its events stay on the Storyline but are unable to resolve. If any event is
unable to resolve when it comes up, simply ignore it and continue to the next event.
- 31 -
Glossary of Terms and Keywords
[X]bound
Keyword Ability. This minion is disabled while
not occupying a certain type of location. For
example, a minion with Waterbound is disabled
while not occupying a water location, etc.
A unit being carried may still cast spells or activate
abilities as normal. If the carried unit moves to a
location that the carrying unit doesn’t occupy, the
unit ceases to be carried.
Adjacent
Refers to the card’s own square, and the squares
that it shares a border with.
Airborne
Keyword Ability. This minion may fly while on the
surface, gaining the following benefits:
When taking a step this minion may move
diagonally and can only be intercepted by other
units if they have Airborne or Ranged.
This minion cannot be targeted by attacks, unless
the attacking unit has the Airborne ability.
Ally/Allied
A unit that you control (including your Avatar).
Banish
Remove from the game.
Body of Water
A contiguous cluster of adjacent water sites.
Broken
cemetery.
Broken cards are artifacts that can be found in any
Burrowing
Keyword Ability. This unit can be safely summoned
to, exist in, and operate normally underground.
When taking a step, it can instead move from the
surface of a land site to the underground level
there, or vice versa.
Cardinal Directions
When a card talks about a cardinal direction, it
includes all of the squares in the direction indicated
on the card to the front, rear, left and right.
Carrying Units
Some units can carry other units. A unit with
this ability, picks them up or drops them in the
same manner and time as it would artifacts (see
page 26). Units that have Airborne, Burrowing,
Submerge, or Voidwalk confer those abilities to
units they are carrying while they are carried.
Charge
Keyword Ability. This unit can tap, or be tapped,
to pay for costs associated with any ability on the
turn it is summoned.
Conjure
When a card is conjured, put it directly into play.
Damage and Life Loss
Generally, units take damage from fighting and
from the effects of spells and abilities. Damage
dealt to minions accumulates until the end of turn
when it is healed, while damage dealt to an Avatar
causes them to lose life instead. Sometimes an
Avatar will suffer life loss directly from things like
a site being successfully attacked.
When a minion has damage on it equal to or greater
than its power, it dies.
Note: When an Avatar is at death’s door, only
damage will deliver a death blow.
Dead
cemetery.
Dead cards are minions that can be found in any
Death Blow
When an Avatar is at death’s door, any damage
dealt to them is a death blow, signaling their defeat.
Death’s Door
When an Avatar’s life is reduced to 0, they are now
at death’s door and can no longer gain life. At that
moment, the Avatar becomes immune to damage
for the rest of the current turn. After that brief
and desperate window, any damage dealt to the
Avatar is a death blow, ending the game.
Deathrite
Keyword Ability. When this unit dies, do what is
stated before placing it in the cemetery.
Dies, Destroyed, & Killed
When a card dies, is destroyed, or is killed place it in
the cemetery.
- 32 -
Disable/Disabled
While disabled, a minion loses all abilities
(including basic abilities like Move and Attack),
doesn’t strike when fighting, can’t cast spells, and
can’t take any action granted by another card or
effect (ie. strike, shoot a projectile, take a step, etc.).
A disabled minion can still be forcibly moved or
tapped by effects.
Elemental Threshold
A minimum affinity for an element required to cast
a given spell, or trigger or activate some abilities.
Elite
You may include two copies of a card that has the
keyword “Elite” in its type line.
Enemy
A unit (including Avatars) that is controlled by an
opponent.
Exceptional
You may include three copies of a card that has the
keyword “Exceptional” in its type line.
Fight
When two units fight, they strike each other
simultaneously.
If more than two units are involved in a fight, the
controller of each side may allocate their units’
damage among the enemy as they wish.
Flooded
A flooded site becomes a water site and thus also
increases the controller’s water affinity by one
if it was not already a water site. It still provides
any other elemental affinity it did before.
Genesis
Keyword Ability. When this card enters the realm,
do what is stated.
Ground Movement
Ground movement is any step that a unit takes
between the surface of two sites (except Airborne).
Here & There
Some cards will talk about something that is here or
there contextually. When a site is referenced, here
or there means both of a site’s locations, surface and
subsurface. When anything else is being referenced,
it means that thing’s same exact location.
Immobile/Immobilised
This card cannot move itself, and cannot use the
Move and Attack, Intercept, or Defend abilities.
Lance
A minion with the Lance keyword enters play
carrying a lance artifact token. They could use it for
themselves or give it to another minion. The first
time a unit strikes while carrying a lance, it deals
an extra damage and strikes first (see page 23)
if in a fight. Then the lance breaks.
Lance tokens are artifacts for all intents and
purposes. They can be picked up and dropped
(and stolen), just like other artifacts. When they
are broken, they are removed from the realm like
other tokens.
Land Sites
All sites that are not water sites are considered
land sites, including sites with no element icons
and Rubble.
Lethal
Keyword Ability. Any strictly positive amount of
damage this card deals to a minion is enough to kill.
Life
Life represents the amount of damage that your
Avatar can endure before it is placed on death’s
door. As your Avatar incurs damage, its overall life
will decrease accordingly.
Location
The exact location of a card is determined by its
square and by the region that it occupies.
Mana
Mana can come from several sources, but sites are
the most common. When they first come into play
as well as at the start of your turn, sites provide
one mana each. Other cards might add to this total.
You use this mana to cast spells or activate abilities.
At the end of your turn, any remaining mana is lost,
whether or not you used it that turn.
Movement +X
Keyword Ability. This unit may move up to X
additional steps when using the Move and Attack
or Defend basic abilities. To move multiple steps
at once, choose a destination and a path to it then
traverse that path one step at a time. You may need
to resolve automatic triggers (or apply “always on”
passive abilities), some of which may prematurely
stop the motion of the unit.
- 33 -
Moves Freely
When this unit uses the Move and Attack or Defend
abilities they spend no steps when moving, as long
as the starting and ending locations of the step
satisfy the moves freely condition.
Nearby
Refers to the card’s own square, and all squares
that surround it, including those diagonally.
Ordinary
You may include four copies of a card that has the
keyword “Ordinary” in its type line.
Projectiles
A projectile’s flight begins at the shooting unit’s
location and travels within the same region in a
cardinal direction. Its flight continues until it either
reaches the edge of its region or it reaches the first
unit (enemy or ally) along its path, ignoring any
allies at the projectile’s starting location. Different
projectiles will have different effects, but will most
often deal damage to the impacted unit.
In the event of multiple valid units, the player
that fired the projectile chooses which unit the
projectile hits.
Ranged X
Keyword Ability. This unit has “Tap → Shoot a
projectile that stops after 1 (or X) steps. Strike
the impacted unit”. This unit may also intercept
Airborne units flying over them.
Range of Motion
Anywhere a card is allowed to move legally is
considered within its range of motion.
Realm
The realm includes all the squares in the game
zone.
Region
There are four distinct regions in the realm:
surface, underground, underwater, or in the void.
Rubble
A site that has been destroyed is placed in its
owner’s cemetery as normal, but rather than
reverting back to the void, the site is instead
replaced with rubble. Rubble is a neutral land site
that no player controls, and provides no mana or
threshold.
Note: Use Rubble tokens or a face down site to
represent rubble on a square.
Sacrifice
Sacrificing is removing something you control
from the realm and placing it directly in its
owner’s cemetery. A player may be forced to
sacrifice something if an effect instructs them to
do so. When a minion is sacrificed, it does indeed
die, and its Deathrites trigger, if applicable. If
something is sacrificed to pay the cost of an ability,
it is not placed in the cemetery until after that
ability has resolved.
A dying unit cannot be sacrificed. When a site
is sacrificed, it is replaced by rubble. Even
indestructible things can be sacrificed, if a cost
or effect otherwise informs you of the need to
sacrifice something.
Silence/Silenced
A card that is silenced loses all printed and granted
abilities.
Avatars cannot be silenced.
Span of Land
A contiguous cluster of adjacent land sites.
Spellcaster
Keyword Ability. This card may cast spells.
Some spellcasters may only cast spells that match
a specific element. For example, Fire Spellcasters
may only cast spells that have a Fire threshold icon
(marked with ).
Square
One grid square in the realm, that includes all
cards present there.
Stealth
Keyword Ability. Minions with Stealth cannot be
targeted by spells or abilities from your opponents,
they cannot be attacked, intercepted, or defended
against, and projectiles cannot hit them.
Stealth is tracked with a stealth token.
Minions lose Stealth after they activate a special
ability, deal damage, or attack. When this happens,
remove the Stealth token.
Step
A step is the minimum unit of distance between
two adjacent locations.
- 34 -
Storyline (see page 31)
A sequence of events that is currently resolving. A
unit that casts a spell, or activates an ability will
start a storyline and add events to it. Triggered
abilities can insert events into a storyline during
its resolution, interrupting future events.
Strike
A unit deals damage equal to its power.
Strike First
Units that strike first resolve their strikes before
their target can resolve theirs. If multiple units in
the same fight are able to strike first, they all strike
at the same time. Then any surviving units without
that ability make their strikes.
Stronger, Strongest, Weaker, and
Weakest
Some effects compare the power of two units:
•
Stronger: Strictly more power than.
•
Strongest: Strictly highest power.
•
Weaker: Strictly less power than.
•
Weakest: Strictly lowest power.
In the case of ties, the active player chooses.
When comparing a minion with split power, add
the two power values together and then divide
that in half to determine their comparative value.
Submerge
Keyword Ability. This unit can be safely summoned
to, exist in, and operate normally underwater.
When taking a step, it can instead move from the
surface of a water site to the underwater level
there or vice versa.
Summon
When a card is summoned, put it directly into play.
Tapping a Card (see page 20)
Cards in the realm can be tapped as a cost to
activate various abilities. A player may also need
to tap a card as a cost related to other spells or
abilities on other cards.
To tap a card, turn a it 90° to the right, from an
upright position. Only untapped cards and tokens
in play can be tapped. All of your cards in play
automatically (and necessarily) untap at the start
of your turn.
Target
Sometimes you will need to target things in the
realm. Spells and abilities can only target things
within the Spellcaster’s or referencing card’s
same region.
Transform
When a card is transformed it is considered
the same game object as its previous version
and therefore does not suffer from summoning
sickness when it comes into play. If one card
transforms into another card, the original card is
removed from the game after the transformation.
Underground
The lower level of a land site is part of the
underground region.
Underwater
The lower level of a water site is part of the
underwater region.
Unique
You may include one copy of a card that has the
keyword “Unique” in its type line.
Units
Units are a collective term that includes Avatars
and minions.
Void
A square without a site is a part of the void region.
Avatars can never enter void locations. Minions
there are banished unless they have Voidwalk.
Voidwalk
Keyword Ability. This unit can be summoned to
any void location and safely exist and operate there.
When taking a step it can move into an adjacent
void, or out of the void and onto the surface of an
adjacent site (or directly to the subsurface if they
can operate there).
Water Sites
Water sites are identified by the water icon marked
with . All other sites are considered land sites,
including sites with no threshold icons and rubble.
- 35 -
Sorcery: Contested Realm Quick Reference Guide Quick Reference Guide
The Golden Rule
Navigation Terms
Some text is intentionally informal or necessarily
compact. Use common sense and be cool.
The Four Elements
Sorcery: Contested Realm is built around the four
classical elements:
Earth
Fire
Air Water
Turn Sequence
Start Phase
Step 1: Untap all of your cards in the realm.
Step 2: All of your sites provide their mana.
Step 3: Trigger abilities that happen at the
start of the turn.
Step 4: End the Start Phase by drawing a card
from either your spellbook or atlas.
Regions: Surface, Underground, Underwater, and
the Void are all separate regions in the game.
Location: The exact location of a card is
determined by its square and by the region that
it occupies.
Here & There: Some cards will talk about
something that is here or there contextually.
When a site is referenced, here or there means
both of a site’s locations, surface and subsurface.
When anything else is being referenced, it means
that thing’s same exact location.
Target: Spells and abilities can only target things
within the Spellcaster’s or referencing card’s
same region.
Adjacent: Refers to the card’s own square and
the squares that it shares a border with.
Nearby: Refers to the card’s own square and
all squares that surround it, including those
diagonally.
Main Phase
Your units can cast spells and activate their
abilities. You may take these actions as many
times as you have resources to do so, and in any
order you like.
End Phase
Step 1: Trigger abilities that happen at the end
of the turn.
Step 2: Players remove all damage from their
minions and artifacts in the realm.
Step 3: Effects that last for your turn now end.
Step 4: Your turn ends.
Adjacent
Nearby
Adjacent & Nearby Locations: Only locations
that are in the same region as the referencing
card (or its spellcaster) are considered adjacent
or nearby locations.
Steps: A step is the minimum unit of distance
between two adjacent locations.
Remember
•
If the text of a card contradicts the rulebook, the card text takes precedence (pg 5).
•
If you are the first player, you do not draw a card on your first turn (pg 16).
•
Cards and abilities add events to the Storyline (pg 31). If multiple events compete to be added
at the same moment, the non-active player’s events are added and resolved first, and then
the active player’s.
- 36 -
Sorcery: Contested Realm Quick Reference Guide Quick Reference Guide
Common Keyword Abilities
Many units have keyword abilities printed in their game text. These keywords have rules associated
with them, which you can find listed alphabetically below as well as in the glossary (page 32).
Airborne
This minion may fly while on the surface, gaining
the following benefits:
When taking a step this minion may move
diagonally and can only be intercepted by other
units if they have the Airborne or Ranged ability.
This minion cannot be targeted by attacks, unless
the attacking unit has the Airborne ability.
Burrowing
This unit can be safely summoned to, exist in, and
operate normally underground. When taking a
step, it can move from the surface of a land site to
the underground level there, or vice versa.
Charge
This unit can tap, or be tapped, to pay for costs
associated with any ability on the turn it is
summoned.
Deathrite
When this unit dies, do what is stated before placing
it in the cemetery.
Disable/Disabled
While disabled, a minion loses all abilities
(including basic abilities like Move and Attack),
doesn’t strike when fighting, can’t cast spells, and
can’t take any action granted by another card or
effect (ie. strike, shoot a projectile, take a step, etc.).
A disabled minion can still be forcibly moved or
tapped by effects
Genesis
When this card enters the realm, do what is stated.
Immobile/Immobilised
This card cannot move itself, and cannot use the
Move and Attack, Intercept, or Defend abilities.
Lethal
Any strictly positive amount of damage this card
deals to a minion is enough to kill.
Movement +X
This unit may move up to X additional steps when
using the Move and Attack or Defend abilities. To
move multiple steps at once, choose a destination
and a path to it then traverse that path one step at
a time. You may need to resolve automatic triggers
(or apply “always on” passive abilities), some of
which may prematurely stop the motion of the
unit.
Ranged X
This unit has “Tap → Shoot a projectile that stops
after 1 (or X) steps. Strike the impacted unit”. This
unit may also intercept Airborne units flying over
them.
Spellcaster
This card may cast spells.
Stealth
Minions with Stealth cannot be targeted by spells
or abilities from your opponents, they cannot be
attacked, intercepted, or defended against, and
projectiles cannot hit them.
Stealth is tracked with a stealth token.
Minions lose Stealth after they activate a special
ability, deal damage, or attack. When this happens,
remove the Stealth token.
Submerge
This unit can be safely summoned to, exist in, and
operate normally underwater. When taking a step,
it can move from the surface of a water site to the
underwater level there, or vice versa.
Voidwalk
This unit can be summoned to any void location
and safely exist and operate there. When taking a
step it can move into an adjacent void, or out of
the void and onto the surface of an adjacent site
(or directly to the subsurface if they can operate
there).
- 37 -

